What day is it today?
It's a holiday for Canadians, right?
We don't really have to be here.
We have the day off.
We're going to be working next Monday.
But I thought that
since it's Victoria Day,
which commemorates the
birthday of Queen Victoria,
it's a national holiday in Canada.
This traditionally marks
only six more weeks of winter
in Canada on Victoria Day.
So I'm hopeful that the sound is
on on this computer so that you
can all rise and sing with me,
"God Save the Queen."
[Transcript missing]
I want to show you the tools.
I want you to understand the
titles of the other sessions,
and I want to talk about what is
the deal with WebObjects 4.5.1.
It's an application server.
I don't like that term,
but that's what we're stuck with.
It vends applications with, usually,
web interfaces to the internet.
But it's more than that.
Most importantly,
it's a collection of frameworks that
do a whole lot of really good stuff for
you that we'll see in a few moments.
For instance, you write apps,
and they run on this square thing here,
and they vend interfaces by
collecting data from a bunch
of different data sources,
by manufacturing these objects,
by exploiting relationships
between the objects,
and delivering a variety of
different UIs to the end user.
It's a developer tool.
It's got a steep learning curve,
but that's okay,
because that means you learn a
lot in a short period of time.
WebObjects works with Java.
By the way, because it's Victoria Day,
we'll be pronouncing it Java for
the remainder of the session.
And we'll be saying, "Project Builder."
in the Canadian way.
Works with a variety of databases,
a variety of different UIs,
a variety of different web servers.
Open, open, open, open, open, open, open.
Where can you use it?
You can develop, as Ernie mentioned,
Windows continues to be
a development platform,
but I think the experience on
Mac OS X is awful darn good.
You can deploy on OS X, on Windows 2000,
on Solaris, on HPX,
theoretically on anything with the
right kind of Java 2 environment.
And you can mix and match these
things as needed and start small
on one little server and grow
to a big hog in deployment.
You might start with one application
running on a little server like this,
and then through the ease and miracle
of the WebObjects deployment tools,
grow to a big scary complicated thing
like this where you've got several
copies of the same app there and
several over here and multiple servers
and multiple databases and so on.
The hard work of managing that kind
of scalability is done for you.
I should do a survey here.
Put up your hands if you
hate it when they stop to
ask you to put up your hands.
People hate that?
Okay, we'll keep going.
Key ideas.
Web components at the front end.
Components that manage,
that are responsible usually for HTML.
Enterprise objects at the back end
that contain data drawn from databases,
but they're kept apart and
bound together at runtime.
These components typically
can... Excuse me.
Let's just take a second.
Okay.
Hello.
Oh, hello.
Fine.
Yeah, okay.
All right, I'm going to say Panama.
Okay, say hi to Regis.
Where were we?
These HTML templates, come on,
this is serious.
These HTML templates contain
this one special WebObject tag
that's really a marker that says,
here's where something
good's going to happen.
Here's where we're going to
send a message to another object
to cause something to happen.
And on top of that,
there is a separate bindings
file that defines the meaning
of each of these tags,
and a whole lot of pre-written objects
that participate in this whole process.
These components at the front
end typically emit strings,
often HTML strings, sometimes plain text.
They could be binary image data,
they could be Apple script commands,
they could be virtually anything.
They can be non-HTML components,
they can be PDF-based.
We have a partner, ReportMill,
who's exhibiting over in the show
that has a tremendous PDF-based
reporting solution that really
works great with WebObjects.
We have a partner in Europe, WAPObjects.
We do XML natively,
and I'm going to show you some XML stuff
if all goes well later in the demo,
for which I have 72
minutes and 30 seconds.
I've got a great clock here,
and I like that scoreboard.
I like that scoreboard up there.
Did you see there was a scoreboard
to count how many mistakes I make?
I mean, they could put those up for
the visiting team or something.
Enterprise objects at the back end.
These are the objects that
implement your business rules.
They're typically named after
things in your business,
like customers, students, courses,
and so on.
We have an adapter that draws the data
for these things out of a data source,
and we have these model files that
pick a particular adapter from the vast
array of adapters that we have now,
and fetch data from some data
source and deliver certain kinds
of objects to your application.
They also automatically manage,
in a very slick way,
relationships between objects.
You're going to see me go
completely crazy with the
relationships a little later.
But this back end Enterprise Objects
framework part is the real gem.
These are pure business objects
that have no notion of the fact
that they are rendering HTML or
rendering PDF or sending out WAP.
They simply respond to messages
and deliver back an answer,
and something else creates
them from the database.
The Enterprise Object isn't even
really aware that it was fetched
from Oracle or Sybase or Frontbase or
whatever your favorite actually is.
It's all completely managed
for you in a very clean way.
These are all bound together
by your WebObjects application
that locates these tags,
sends a variety of messages,
takes the results,
stirs them into the component,
sends it back to the end user
with literally a million and one
hooks by which you can customize
this entire process at runtime.
along with some advanced
session management.
Every WebObjects application
for free has a session object
that you can extend as needed.
And this session object contains
whatever you want in there,
knowing you know that WebObjects
arranges to have one session
object for every distinct user
who's coming to your application.
You can extend this session object
to manage a shopping cart or to keep
track of what a user's been doing.
And WebObjects sorts out the thousands
of requests that are coming in
and delivers them automatically
to the correct session objects.
There's also some
runtime monitoring tools.
The Monitor tool manages
that huge deployment.
Remember that ugly slide I had with
all the instances all over the place?
Monitor takes care of making
sure that they're all running,
that they're all healthy,
gives you statistics,
restarts them as needed.
Well, let's see how this actually works.
I want to do a little diagram here
and show you the sequence of flow of
control of a WebObjects application.
It's the internet up there.
And we have a web server and
maybe several app servers in
the database at the back end.
I understand the internet has grown.
I was going to put four iMacs on
it this year instead of three,
but we ran out of time.
So just to elaborate once again
what the various platforms are,
that web server could be anything.
It could be virtually anything.
We have an adapter that plugs
into the web server and takes
requests coming in from the user on
their web browser and routes them
to the appropriate application.
And through that web server,
the responses from these applications
are delivered back to the end user.
We have special plug-ins for a
variety of popular web servers,
the Netscape server, Apache, IIS.
We have a generic CGI plug-in if you're
running some other peculiar web server.
Web server?
Web server, pardon me.
And the application server has...
A limitless now that is Java 2,
a potentially limitless collection
of machines that you could
deploy the application on.
Anywhere there's a Java 2 environment.
This is a major step from last year.
Last year we had to tell you that
you could use HPUX or Solaris or
Windows NT or Mac OS X server.
Now you can use virtually anything
with the appropriate Java runtime.
The adapter at the back end,
in the past we had several
different adapters,
one for every distinct database,
and there was a whole mishmash of
which adapters ran on which servers,
and a lot of restrictions that
prevented you from getting,
for instance, the SQL Server if you
were running on Mac OS X.
A lot of other combinations didn't work,
but now that we've got JDBC as a pure
Java way of moving the SQL commands
back and forth from the database,
we can talk to all the databases
on all the different platforms.
So let's suppose we had a
really simple application here,
and we're going to follow the flow
of control here to give you an idea
of the processing that's going on.
I'm picturing some sort of
beginner application where
I type my username in there,
and then it fetches some
info about me and says,
"Hi, Steve."
Well, there's really three steps
that are going on here.
The WebObjects application
is going to take some values
from that initial request.
It's going to notice that you typed S.
Hayman in a form field.
It's going to invoke
some sort of an action,
some sort of logic that says, all right,
we got this submit button.
What do we do now?
What page do we go to?
What processing do we do?
And then it's going to
generate a response,
a stream of HTML that's going
to come back to the end user.
How does this actually happen?
Well, a user would submit a
request to a web server.
The adapter on the web server would
find one of many different instances,
many different identical processes
representing your application,
and forward the request to the right one.
Your session object in there would
find the WebObjects component
that generated the initial page,
the component that put up
the "What's your name?" page,
and it would study the various
form values that came in.
We seem to have received a text field,
someone has typed "shayman"
in the text field,
and according to our instructions,
we need to bind that to
our username variable.
The requesting component,
then there's another
step that goes through.
It figures out which action to invoke.
The submit button is connected in it by a
means I'll show you to perhaps a specific
Java message being sent to a specific
class back in the application server.
That class might be a method called,
that action might be a method
called handle login here.
Returns another component.
So there'd be some Java code
associated with this.
They could do whatever
business logic you want.
I want to fetch the customer with
the username that we just got,
and I want to return some other page,
and I want to put the
customer's name in the session.
That kind of thing is a
fairly common paradigm.
That action returns another component.
That other component is the
thing that's going to generate
the response to the end user.
So the session loads
the response component,
another one of these things
with WebObject tags in it.
It studies them.
It finds the tags.
It identifies what it needs to do.
It's going to use these to
replace in this component so that
it can generate the response.
In this case, it's noticing I've got
a thing here called a,
I've got in my HTML file,
I've got this tag that
says name equals username,
and in this extra file,
I have a definition that says username,
it's a string, and you send the message
customer to the session object,
and you send the message
first name to that object.
Whatever comes out of that,
replace this little tag with it.
And all that's,
that may cause various objects
to be fetched from the database,
all transparently.
Via this enterprise objects framework.
We might in this case need to
load some sort of an enterprise
objects model that says,
oh, by the way,
customer objects are coming out
of the cust table on Oracle.
And the enterprise objects framework
automatically figures out whatever
ugly SQL it has to generate.
It sends it to the database.
A bunch of rows come
back from the database,
and they're converted
into enterprise objects.
And this is all happening while you wait.
It's all happening without the need
for you to have any intervention here.
This is a very seamless process.
So a customer... A customer object
is created with the results of
that fetch from the database
and populated with some data.
We've got this model set up
that says customers have a name,
and they have an address,
and they have a first name and
a last name and a relationship
to some other things.
The object is created automatically.
We need to send the message first name
to that customer object and it responds,
"Steve, hey." Coincidence.
And that response is substituted
back into the WebObjects template.
You can see it used to say WebObject
name equals username and now that's
replaced with this single string,
Steve.
So the stuff that's actually going
out to the end user has no evidence
that it's ever actually been through
this entire WebObjects process here.
Then this session sends the
plain HTML back to the user,
and they are happy, happy, happy.
Here it comes.
Welcome back, Steve.
But it's actually a fairly elegant
process when you get used to it.
I mean, it seems like 300 steps
when I describe it here,
and it seemed like 10,000 steps
when I was making this slide.
Most of those steps just
happen automatically for
every WebObjects application.
It's just one of the many
great things that you get for
free with this environment.
And we call that the
request-response loop.
Request comes in from a user,
and a response is generated
and sent back to that user.
And if you look into the
WebObjects documentation,
we all heard how swell the
WebObjects documentation is becoming,
you'll see a variety of methods
like take values from requests,
or invoke action, or append to response.
And these messages are
automatically delivered to various
components in your application,
if they wish to receive them.
And they can all participate in
this and add their own little bits
of HTML or modify state in some
way as the result is going back.
So that request-response loop was
considerably more important to
WebObjects developers one year ago,
because if you wanted to do that
more than 100 times a minute,
you had to give us $50,000.
Now you just give us $700.
You can do it.
as many times as you like.
What a deal, what a deal.
You'll note from this that
the SQL and the HTML are kept
as far apart as possible.
This is really a fundamental
tenet of WebObjects.
We keep database logic over here,
database access stuff over here.
We keep user interface code
for drawing UIs over here.
We keep business logic in the middle.
And there's no need for
you as a developer to worry
about writing HTML yourself.
We have tools that can help you do that.
Or generating SQL yourself.
Again, we have tools,
our modeling tool that builds that model.
They all figure out how to do that.
Unless you want to.
And that's one of the other great things
about WebObjects is that if you want to,
you can override virtually every
one of those arrows on that last
presentation and cause something
special to happen in your case.
Frequently, not necessary,
but a great thing to have in the
bag of tools as we move along.
I need a brief drink of water here.
Excuse me.
Is there really 100
degrees in South Africa?
Sacramento today?
I mean, isn't that like the
boiling point of water?
How do you stand it down here?
So let's talk about the tools.
Project Builder, WebObjects Builder,
EOModeler.
WebObjects Builder is one of the
more interesting ones that you can
learn all about in session 603 on
the introduction to WebObjects tools.
It recognizes the fact that you need
to create a whole bunch of these
WebObjects components in an application.
And a component typically
contains some HTML,
like we just saw,
with these WebObject tags in them.
And that's, it's a directory called,
let's say, main.wo with a file in
it called main.html.
Then there's a second
file called the wad file,
love that name, the wad file,
that defines the meaning of each
of these tags in the first file.
So you see, we're keeping anything even
remotely resembling business
logic out of the HTML.
Just this one little tag
that we put in the HTML.
Hands up, everyone who says,
how come you didn't write
the closing slash WebObject
tag on this little example?
All the, yeah, all right,
all my buddies over here.
Why did the font would have
been too small if I did that?
Technically,
WebObject name equals string,
and then a closing slash WebObject tag.
Closing tag.
You can learn all about that.
Are we going into, like,
that level of detail in
any of the other sessions?
I don't know.
But there's typically a Java class
associated with each of these as well.
So my main component, for instance,
there's really three
files associated with it.
An HTML file,
a WebObject declaration file,
and a bit of business
logic in this Java file.
Java file, really?
Do you really prefer that?
I can't believe it.
And a bit of logic that you as a
developer write that defines what
happens for some of these tags.
When we click on place order
on the hyperlink over there,
it sends this message,
and it adds something to a shopping cart,
and it takes us to a checkout page.
You write logic like that in a Java file.
WebObject combines it at runtime
with these HTML and WAD pieces in
a stream of often plain HTML is
sent back to the end user.
That would be a simple component.
You're going to create a lot of
these in a WebObjects application.
Usually one for each page,
often one for little
subcomponents of the page.
You can have interesting
components from your buddies and
drag them into the application
and reuse them in effective ways.
You can have components that wrap
themselves around other components to
enhance what the inner one is doing.
And we provide components for a bunch
of common UI elements out of the box,
but you typically write lots of your
own using the WebObjects builder tool.
Now, how do you actually
make these components?
They're all files, okay?
You can use whichever your favorite
tool is for editing these things.
But, you know,
there are sort of professional
level tools as well.
And I don't know why you
couldn't do it with CAT,
although Unix hackers,
maybe we'd rather use DD.
You know,
you could use that to create a component.
All right, let's show that.
But you can also use any
visual HTML editor you like.
Some of them, particularly Go Live,
have excellent support for
managing WebObjects tags as well.
And we have our own tool
that we think you'll like.
Now, nobody says you have to
use WebObjects Builder,
but it's pretty nice.
Engineering has done a
nice job on this thing.
So this is what WebObjects
Builder looks like when it's
editing one of these components.
And you're going to see
this in excruciating detail
in a few minutes here.
You have a view of some HTML in the
middle with little taggy things in
there that represent objects you've
dropped into this HTML application.
Up at the top, you have an inspector that
tells you the properties of
the currently selected thing.
In this case, I've got that click
here hyperlink selected,
so you can see the properties of
a WO hyperlink object at the top.
At the bottom,
you have an object browser that shows
you what attributes and methods are
available in the collection of objects
that your application currently contains.
You draw lines.
I can tell here that my main
component has an application variable,
a session variable, a product variable.
It also has a place order method.
WebObjects Builder has figured this
out by looking around at the other
tools to see what you're doing.
I would like it when the user
clicks on that hyperlink.
To send the message place order back
to my main object so I can figure
out how to get to the next page.
Well, you do this by drawing a line.
It doesn't look exactly like that.
That was the closest
I could come in PowerPoint.
But you draw a line from the method that
you want at the bottom to the object
you want to connect it to at the top,
the hyperlink in this case,
and you choose a property
of hyperlink objects.
Hyperlinks have a string
that they can contain,
and they have a direct action
name that I really must read the
documentation about sometimes.
And they have a bunch of other
properties here that are available.
But I want to connect it to action,
which is certainly the most popular
one of all the hyperlink methods.
This is the method you connect
to if you want a hyperlink
to actually do something.
And having done that,
you'll see at the top the inspector
reflects that particular change.
So WebObjects Development with WebObjects
Builder is an ongoing process of
drawing lots of these little lines,
connecting things from here to there,
picking through objects
in your browser down here,
designing your HTML visually up here,
and saving it all as one of
these main.wo components.
So you can do that with
WebObjects Builder,
or header.wo, or catalogitem.wo.
If you like,
you can also work in raw mode.
If you're really excited
about typing raw HTML,
you can dive into that
with WebObjects Builder,
and it will give you a view of the text
of the HTML file and the actual text
of the wad file if you insist on that.
Occasionally that's handy.
You can also use palettes
to organize your stuff.
These first two over here are
palettes that come with WebObjects.
There's, I think,
five that come with WebObjects now.
I'm a bit of a palette pack rat,
and you'll see some of my others later.
You can create your own palettes
with useful objects on them,
like the amazing pluralizer
that we saw last year,
or a shopping cart, or a buy button,
or a localizer bar.
Write these little things once
and put them on a palette.
Then you can reuse them in WebObjects
easily by dragging and dropping.
Sure, I was wondering what that
one in the middle is.
It's not working right now.
I really wanted to show it to you.
That's a shame.
We'll give it a shot.
If we have lots of extra time at the end,
we'll give it a shot.
Another important tool, EOModeler.
This is really an editor
for EOModelD files,
or if you want to be incredibly pedantic,
EOModelD directories that
contain a bunch of files.
One of these object models is full
of information that describes how to
connect to a particular data source,
how to retrieve values from
certain tables in that data source,
what kind of objects to make,
what kind of relationships
to have between them.
And EOModeler is really a
graphical editor that lets
you set all this stuff up.
So this is one that's kind of finished
for a CARS database that you might have.
And hidden inside this EOModel is a lot
of useful information that you've set up.
There's database connection information
that tells you the particular
database that you want to talk to.
In this case, we're talking to, you know,
that's not even right.
That's the way to get to the real one.
I made that last night.
I looked at my slide and I thought, oh,
geez, my old one was wrong,
and this one is not really any better.
But you'll see that in a moment,
because we're going to make an EOModel.
And you'll see what it
actually looks like.
There's also information about
entities and tables built in here.
An entity is a kind of a thing,
a general class of things
that come out of an EOModel.
The table is the particular
database table they come from.
We can see in here that the MDL table in,
let's say, our Oracle database that
this thing is connecting to,
every row in that is going to
correspond to a vehicle object.
I'm not stuck with ugly schemas
with incorrectly spelled
table names in the data.
Not that that ever happens.
But in the database, I can put a nice,
meaningful view on it.
I want vehicle objects to come
out of the MDL table in Oracle.
There's also detailed information
about each of these entities.
The vehicle object, you can see it's got
a bunch of properties.
It has a base price and a loaded
price and some image JPEG data.
And those things all
correspond to certain columns,
certain columns in the Oracle table
that we're getting this stuff from.
For instance,
the base price of the vehicle corresponds
to the PRMin column in Oracle.
So once the Enterprise Objects
Framework has manufactured one
of these vehicle objects for you,
you can send it the message base price,
and it's going to go, oh, okay,
here you go, returning the data from that
column of the Oracle table.
There's also relationship
information down here at the bottom.
Vehicles have a related maker object.
The Corvette object is
related to the Chevrolet.
Some of the relationship
information in the bottom half,
we can see that there's maker objects
corresponding to a different table,
and EOModeler maintains
these relationships,
sometimes one-to-one.
A car has one maker.
Sometimes they're one-to-many.
Chevrolet makes a whole bunch of cars.
And all that information about
how to actually do those SQL joins
is hidden in this model and is
something you can exploit very
easily later with WebObjects Builder.
EOModeler can manage some fairly
complex relationships here.
You get a diagram view that you saw in
the previous presentation that lets you
see what relationships actually exist.
You can even draw new ones that might
not be actually defined by the database.
And my favorite part of all this
is what we call key value coding.
It's this idea that you can make
up these little expressions.
Vehicle.maker.name.
Ask the vehicle object for its maker.
Ask that object for its name.
You get a string like Chrysler.
Vehicle.packages.
Give me the list of all the packages
that go with this particular car.
You send these simple string
messages with these dots in them.
You send even fancier ones
with this at sign notation.
They can do averages and sums
and maximums and minimums.
And that's that patented key value.
Is it patented?
It's patented, isn't it?
Software patents are evil.
But this is a good one.
This is a good one.
Sorry.
I forgot where I was.
But not this one.
This is a great software patent.
And because it expresses this string.
It's a simple concept that no
one's thought to do before.
A.B.C.D.
as a stream of messages in a,
I was going to say
language independent way,
but that only mattered last year when
we were doing Objective-C and Java.
But in a nice neutral way that lets you
specify how to traverse this graph of
objects and how to get results out of it.
You'll see this exploited
in WebObjectsBuilder when
I get to that in a moment.
I tend to go nuts with these things.
I made up one when I was
working on my demo.
I made up an expression like that that
had seven dots in it and two at signs.
Which was a personal best for me.
I don't think I've ever come up with
a reason to have two of these at signs
in a key value coding expression.
Has anyone ever had two at signs
in key value coding before?
Am I the first?
Oh, geez.
But thank you, there you're not.
But it was so complicated I looked at it,
I couldn't even understand
it after I'd done it,
and I thought, well,
maybe we better not do
that in today's demo,
so we'll try to keep that part simple.
Let's do a really brief EO Modeler demo.
If I could have demo screen three here,
you can see that I'm working
on a machine that's protected
by this secret shroud here.
I think this is our new 18
and three quarter inch monitor
that hasn't been released yet,
so you can't actually look at it.
But I'm looking at a great picture here.
So I want to build a new
model using EOModeler here.
[Transcript missing]
I don't know.
Something about electrical votes.
I don't really know what those are.
But it seems like a great
database to kind of work.
Maybe we can write a business rule
that decides who the winner is and kind
of speed up this process a bit here.
I'll tell you one of the great
things about WebObjects 5,
we have simplified your
choice of database adapter.
JDBC or none.
I love the Nunn adapter,
but I think today we
use the JDBC adapter.
So, one adapter that lets you
connect to a variety of data
sources in a nice cross-platform,
database-independent kind of way.
You need to have what they call
a Type 4 JDBC driver for your
particular database installed
in a certain spot on the system.
But since those are pure Java classes,
you can do that on any machine here.
The fun part is in remembering the
clever syntax for this URL that connects
you to that particular database.
This is my least favorite part here.
JDBC colon, oh God, what am I doing?
Openbase colon slash slash
localhost slash US elections.
That's a URL that describes how to use
JDBC to load a certain kind of driver,
get to Openbase in this case,
and fetch information from
the US elections database
running on this machine.
These plugins are little helpers because
I gather JDBC isn't just quite rich
enough to find all the information
that we need from a remote data source.
So we have little additional
classes that help out here.
And now you're prompted for what
kind of information from that
database do you want to actually
incorporate in your model?
I don't have any stored
procedures to worry about.
I'm going to do custom
enterprise objects later,
but we'll deselect those and
look at the rest of these.
Of all the tables in your database,
which ones do you want to use?
Well, I've got a table for candidates,
and I've got one for elections,
and one for votes, and well,
let's use all of them.
What the heck?
Now,
EOModeler wants to be a nice citizen and
work with the referential integrity rules
that you've specified for the database.
You know, I always hit next here because
I don't know what this is all about.
- I should look that up, you know.
There's a reason I'm in sales
and I'm not actually delivering
the consulting services.
It's probably safer
for everyone that way.
But here is our EO model
that's just been created.
And this is a view like we kind of
saw a few dozen PowerPoint slides ago.
It says that we've got campaign objects
coming from the campaign table and party
objects coming from the party table.
And you can actually look at
these in here if you want.
There's a little data
browser where you can say,
fetch me all the party objects
that you've got in the database.
A whole bunch of them.
The America First Party and the
Farmer Labor Party and the... Oh,
you have a Liberal Party down here.
Oh, isn't that interesting?
I thought that was a bad word.
There's also, for instance,
there's a candidate object,
and you can see that the candidate
object has a first name and
a last name and a home state,
and a couple of relationships.
A candidate is related to a party.
So-and-so ran for the Republican Party.
A candidate has a one-to-many,
indicated by the two arrows,
a one-to-many relationship,
or a list of campaigns that
this candidate has been in.
And there's other useful tables in here.
There's an image table of
photos of certain people,
but I might like to add a relationship
that's actually missing here.
I'd like to be able to get from
the candidate object to the
picture of the candidate object.
So I'll add a new relationship,
not currently defined in the database,
to this particular model.
And in the inspector,
you can give it a little
more detail about this.
I want to go over to the,
from the candidate table
to the image table,
and it's a one-to-one thing.
We're going to join the image
ID here and the image ID there,
connect.
And now that I've done that,
every candidate object I get,
I can now send it this message image,
and it will automatically fetch
the picture of that guy for me.
and it actually does it in a delayed way.
We have this incredible
deferred faulting.
You should really go to some of the
advanced EOF things and learn about this.
It's hilarious.
But the way we can keep stuff from being
fetched until it's actually needed.
These engineering guys,
they've done a lot of work to
minimize the hits to your database.
So this is, I'm editing a document
here and I wanna save this.
Let's call this,
put it on ye old desktop here.
This is my elections.
[Transcript missing]
Kind of like the ice capades with
all this stuff sliding in and out.
It's actually much more powerful and
extensible than the old Project Builder.
I admit it takes a
little getting used to,
but I found that actually after
I read some of the documentation
about Project Builder,
I liked it quite a bit more than
I did before I read the documentation.
This is essentially your
development environment.
You compile things in here,
you add resources,
you check them into and
out of CVS if you want.
You can hear all about
that in other sessions.
I'm going to use it minimally later.
Oh, now we're going to have another demo.
That's great.
Great.
We had one slide in
between those two demos.
I thought I could cool down
a little bit more first.
Can I have this thing back, please?
Let's build a project.
I want to make a new project.
We have all these wizards that
certain people feel they need to use,
but we're going to
actually choose a plain,
unassisted WebObjects application here.
What do we call this?
Woe is me.
How about that?
I want to make a simple
application that lets us browse
for presidential candidates.
The idea is going to be I type
part of the name Hayman,
and I can see if anyone named
Hayman has ever run for president,
which I'll tell you in
advance none of them have.
But we can try other things as well.
So, Project Builder coordinates web
components in your application.
Here's a main.wo that we
were talking about before.
It's a plain, empty little one that
doesn't do very much.
It coordinates classes.
We've got an application object here.
Oh, big font.
Here we go.
An application object that doesn't
really do anything other than to say,
hi, welcome to Woe Is Me,
and a session object that
will be shared by all users.
This is really all the code
there is in this application.
There's a few lines of these
trivial classes here ready
for you to extend as needed.
But I want to start by working on this
main WebObjects interface file here.
So this is that editor we
were talking about before.
If you like, you can think of this as
just a simple HTML editor,
Explore, Exploder?
Okay, Exploder, why not?
You can fool with the fonts and you can
make things bigger and you can bring up
a color panel and be sure to go to the
session 957 on using the color panel.
: There isn't a session.
I like that because this takes me
back to the old Next Color panel.
It's so fun to see
these things still here.
And if you want,
this is just editing HTML.
I haven't really put anything
very interesting in it.
And if you wanted to,
you could pop over and just
look at the raw HTML and fool
with it in here if you wanted.
Nothing to this one yet.
But it gets more interesting when
I want to put dynamic objects,
which are what a lot of these
little buttons are up here,
into my application.
What we really want to
do here is have a form.
That's a form,
going to be rendered as a form
on the user's web browser.
We'll put in someone's last name.
We'll type part of a last name in
the text field and a submit button.
I want to do a legitimate survey here.
Has anybody in the history of
the web ever felt the need to
actually click on the reset button?
[Transcript missing]
: I've had all this politics
on the brain for a while here.
Now, let's actually arrange to fetch
some of these candidate objects.
Now, these tools talk very nicely.
You'll recall that we had our
modeler define a candidate object
with a first name and a last name
and a relationship to a party.
And if I drag this little object
out here and into this view,
it's going to add my object model
to the big woes me application.
And it's going to add what
we call a display group to
this particular component.
And a display group is this total
Swiss Army knife object that knows
how to fetch a certain kind of object.
In this case, candidates.
It knows how to collect the criteria
of what candidate you want to fetch.
Last name is like this.
It knows how to send them
back to you in batches.
Here's the first 10.
Here's the next 10.
So all you need to do is
draw some of those lines to
tell the objects in the UI,
in the top half,
what messages should be sent to
the objects back on the server
to coordinate all this fetching.
So one might start with,
let's have that submit
button send the message,
"Qualify data source."
Draw a line like that.
Now every time a user sees this
submit button in their web browser,
it's going to send the form back to
my application and send the message,
Qualify Data Source,
to the display group.
And the display group is then going
to collect some candidate objects
defined according to my wishes.
This display group also knows the various
properties of the object it's fetching.
So here's all the
properties of candidates,
and you can hook them up here.
I want the candidate's last name as
we're fetching it to be drawn from there.
By the way,
I want all the iServices guys up here,
I want them all to cough
if I miss anything obvious.
Like if I forget to save something,
could you all just cough a little bit
and then I'll just remember to save it?
Thank you.
Well, we could go with this.
We could go with this application.
We could save it and we could run it.
And what would be one slight
problem with this application?
[Transcript missing]
Let's put in a table.
WebObjects has this little
table thing with an idea of,
if you want, a second row that repeats
over and over again.
So I want to have one row of this table
for every candidate that comes back.
And I can ask this display group,
give me all of the displayed objects.
on that repetition.
It's a common design pattern.
You have a repetition associated
with something that's going to
be done over and over again.
So we're going to get one
row of this table for every
candidate that was fetched.
It's also a common design pattern to use
a special object to go through the table,
kind of an iterator object.
So I might want to
come down here and say,
I'd like to add a candidate
object of type can.
I don't even have to
type the whole thing.
It's type can.
I want to create a candidate
object that's private to
this particular component.
And that candidate,
it's got a first name and a last name,
but if I make an association like this,
item, this object will be set once for
everything that came back on the list.
If I fetch 37 candidates,
I'll have 37 rows in the table.
I'll actually have 38 rows
because this is a title row.
Name, and I'll fill these in later.
Well, if I click on this button here,
these are WebObjects strings.
These are the simplest possible objects
in the entire WebObjects framework.
They send a message, they get a result,
they take the string,
they put it into the HTML.
Well, I can have those send a
message like first name to
the current candidate object.
Oh, there's too much junk up here.
First name to the candidate object.
You draw a line like that.
Last name to this other string object.
And this is probably worth actually
trying this to see if it works.
If it doesn't work,
we'll just say goodnight, it'll be great.
But this is a good starting point here.
This will actually display candidates.
It will fetch a list
of candidate objects,
it will iterate through
them one at a time,
and send the first name
and last name to each one.
Get on with it,
I can hear everyone saying.
So we come back here to Project Builder,
we compile, always a good opportunity to
have a little drink of water.
compiling the various Java classes,
it's making a big honkin' jar.
What a WebObjects
application actually is,
it's kind of a complicated
directory with like your .html
files and your .wad files,
and somewhere in there, a jar,
a Java archive of all of your classes.
Then there's all these other
frameworks somewhere else in
the computer that themselves
contain jars and other resources.
And when you run a
WebObjects application,
you're actually launching this
shell script that looks all around,
that constructs this humongous
class path to find all the objects
in all the jars all over the place,
and runs your main class to
get the application going.
And as a convenience,
it also launches your web browser,
see there's the class path by the way,
you didn't believe me, but look at that,
holy mackerel, I'm glad I don't have
This is actually going to launch my web
browser and have it hopefully display
some of these candidates for me here.
Oh, there's my fantastic form.
Let's compare that with what the
original actually looked like.
Everybody whose last name begins with H.
There's a whole bunch of guys
whose names began with H.
How many people can
identify Austin Holcomb?
[Transcript missing]
Well, let's find out.
Given that we have a candidate object,
it's fairly easy to add another string,
one of these strings.
Let's ask the candidate for its
party and ask the party for its name.
I'm now working my way
through that object graph.
I've descended through a
couple of levels down here.
And what's actually going on as I'm
doing this back in the WAD file is
there's now a string called string3,
and it's getting its value by sending
the message party to the candidate and by
sending the message name to that thing.
[Transcript missing]
But by walking through
this graph of objects,
you can put up some pretty interesting
data pretty fast on the screen.
And I'd like to take advantage
of another relationship that's
defined in this database.
You'll see that each candidate
has a thing called campaigns.
That's a list of all the
campaigns that they were in.
You ran in 2000 and '96 and '92
and '37 and 1776 and whenever
else they had elections.
I'd like to display all of those
campaigns for each of these candidates.
Because that gives me -- let's
put a nice little table on here.
We've got to be neat.
Elections.
Which elections was this guy actually in?
Well,
let's put in a handy repetition object.
See that little loopy thing there?
That says, let's just go over some list,
just like we did with the table,
and do something over and over again.
Let's loop over the
candidate's election objects,
like that.
Let me create another little
object here called an election.
This will be a little private
instance of the election class.
[Transcript missing]
Now at this point we have to actually
pause and compile because in all that
it added a whole line of code over here.
It added this line that declared
an object called election.
So we'll just stop.
We'll recompile.
Have another drink of water.
Close this browser.
It'll open it again in a second here.
Our lovely WoeIsMe application.
Look at that class.
I just love that class path when it
goes by because it reminds me how
much work WebObjects is doing for me.
Look at all that stuff it's picking
up that I didn't have to describe.
You have a certain amount of
patter when you're doing this here.
Hey, H.
Oh, look at all these guys that ran
all these different elections.
Somebody ran in 1892.
My database only goes back to 1892.
I'm sorry.
I could not get the complete
database done in time.
Maybe next year we'll go back
to the Magna Carta and have
every election since then.
For now, we can see, oh,
I recognize a couple of these guys.
John Hagelin of the
National Law Party and Warren Harding.
He was somebody, wasn't he?
And Benjamin Harrison.
Didn't he win?
I don't know.
We'll get to that later.
But it might be interesting to click
on some of these elections and find
out a little more information about it.
I gather that 2000 election
was kind of interesting.
A little news about that
filtered over the border.
So it might be useful to have a
page where we can display some
details about a particular election.
This gives me an excuse to introduce
the idea of a component that does one
thing and that does one thing well.
I want to make a little
component in WebObjects Builder.
I'll make a new one.
And actually, you know what?
I got two ways to do it.
And the other way is better for
reasons that are not worth explaining
right at this point in time.
I want to make a new WebObjects
component inside Project Builder.
For anyone who's wondering
why I do it this way,
take a look at Radar.
Election Details.
And, you know,
you should go to the Project Builder
session to figure out what the heck is
going on with all these target things.
I think that's the one I want.
I don't know.
Is there coughing going on over there?
No coughing.
Good.
I'm all right.
I've created another
component and I've added it.
- To my application.
And the idea of this one is gonna be,
it's gonna have its own
private election object.
Let's create another one.
And let's remember to set it,
'cause we wanna set it
from the first page.
The fabulous election of some year.
And we're going to display everybody
who ran in this particular election.
Another table.
You don't have to talk,
you can really do this pretty fast.
Each election we want to go
through all the campaigns
associated with that election.
We want to have a campaign
object on this page as well,
because these are separate pages,
separate objects.
And for each campaign,
that's going to be my list.
I want to display the first
name and the last name,
just like we did before,
of the candidate relationship.
I've got a lot of
relationships in this database.
First name and last name.
Let's display the party
because it's so easy.
It is.
Stop laughing.
It is easy.
You'll love this.
Party, the party's name.
And let's put titles on it because
my mother might be watching
the DVD and she'll wonder why
I didn't put titles on here.
Candidate.
By the way,
I'd like to say hello to everyone
that's watching the DVD in the future.
Hello, people in the future
with the flying cars.
How are you?
How is WebObjects version 14?
Are you looking back at this and going,
that was so primitive,
I can't believe it.
How did my children turn out?
Did they go to college?
I hope so.
Can I expense their tuition now?
Can I expense their tuition with
that because I mentioned them?
No, I don't think so.
Pari, party.
Thank you.
I spelled party wrong.
And let's get fancy here.
Let's display, whoop, no, not up there.
Let's display how many
votes each person got,
because this really gets into
borderline abuse of this whole
key value coding business here.
But if you dig deeply
into this kind of stuff,
you can say for each, where are we here?
For each campaign, I'm gonna add up,
take all the votes objects
and display them there.
But I don't really wanna
list all the votes objects.
What I wanna do is,
is throwing this little token that says,
"Sum." Don't list the things
on the right hand side,
add them up.
That's going to add up how
many votes each guy got.
All that is a nice object that can
display everything about one election,
provided we tell it
which election we want.
One could do that on the first page.
Remember the main page?
Remember how we had a
hyperlink or a piece of text
displaying the election year?
I can make that into a hyperlink
by clicking on that little
button which wraps this thing
inside a WO hyperlink object.
And hyperlinks actually send
an action message back to the
application when they're clicked on,
just like my submit button did.
But I want this one to send
an application of my choosing.
Show me all about this here election.
How long can an identifier be in Java?
I don't know.
It's at least that long.
And I'll tell it to go, oh,
I just typed E and it knew I had a page
called election details in there already.
and we'll arrange for that hyperlink.
"Show me all about this here
election" to be called for every one.
These are going to be hyperlinks.
Even though there's 30
election years on the page,
they're all sending the same
message back to WebObjects.
WebObjects knew how it made this page,
so it can easily just figure out which
of all those 35 election objects is
the one that sent me this message.
This is really a powerful concept.
You're not encoding junk
into the URLs yourself as
you generate these pages.
You're letting WebObjects do all the
heavy lifting of sorting out these
collections of objects and indicating
to you which one was actually selected.
Save that, save that,
come back to project-- oh, no, wait,
what are you doing?
Sorry, wrong application.
Save that.
Okay, here we go.
Steve's going to try to type a line
of Java code without making a mistake.
Here's my main application.
Here is my nice
show-me-all-about-this-here
election method that I just asked
WebObjects Builder to create for me.
You can see what it's doing here.
It's looking up the page
called Election Details,
and it's returning that page.
That page will be blank if I don't
dive in here and rescue the situation.
Well, I'm going to tell the next page.
[Transcript missing]
Oh, is there any hope that I've done
all that without making a mistake?
Didn't hear any coughing over here.
Oh, not the sneeze!
Oh no, not the sneeze!
That was a secret signal for
something that I've forgotten.
Okay.
Let's try running this again here.
How come no one's asked why I'm running
the classic Internet Explorer yet
and not the Carbon one?
will become clear in a moment.
It's part of my fascination with XML and
my shock and horror at how some things
aren't implemented as widely as you hope
when you start designing your WWDC demo.
Thank you.
That will become clear in a second here.
Here's a bunch of guys.
They ran in all these elections.
Tell me about the 2000 election.
All these guys ran in the year 2000,
and I've totaled up their votes.
Well, that table,
that's not the most attractive
table I could possibly recommend.
You know, you don't believe me,
this is a real database.
Tell me about 1952.
Who here voted in the 1952 election?
Bob, did you?
No?
Okay.
Well, the 2000,
that's one that I remember,
the 2000 election.
And now that I've got
this page going here,
we'll look at the details page.
And the first thing I might
do is to take that string
that's representing the number,
and in the inspector, one can say,
don't just pump out the number,
pump it out with commas,
because that just looks so nice.
Makes a change like that.
It's coming out with commas.
Whoo, yeah.
You can take a,
you see this little path down here?
This is how things are nested.
I've got a string inside a table data,
inside a table row,
inside a WL repetition.
I could take that table
data and inspect it and say,
you should horizontally align
everything to the right,
because that would probably look better.
That does look better.
You can even come in here and say,
let's add in this first
cell an image object.
Remember I added that image
relationship about 23 minutes
and 11 seconds ago in the demo?
That was not for no reason.
Try translating that sentence.
Remember, my candidate object has a
relationship to an image object.
Images have some data,
and they have a MIME type that just
says whether they're GIF or JPEG.
I happen to have a database
table full of images here.
Conveniently.
Oh, that's better.
How do you like that?
Would you vote for this guy?
Well, a lot of people voted
for some of these guys.
And to my naive view,
I might think that since this
number is greater than this number,
but what do I know?
I don't know.
I don't know anything.
I have a Canadian math degree.
We do it a different way up there.
So you know what,
I'm kind of a visual guy.
Not only am I a rugged outdoorsman,
but I'm also kind of a visual guy.
And I would like to leverage some work
that's already been done in this area.
How many of you have
heard of SVG from Adobe?
Scalable Vector Graphics.
Looks a lot like PostScript in many ways,
only it's XML.
It's a way of describing an image
and sending it to a browser,
and then the browser is
going to draw it for you.
I want to draw those little maps
like they have on election night
with all the states colored in.
Wouldn't that be cool?
I've already got in my
database information about,
you didn't see the electoral,
there's an electoral votes
table in there as well,
but how many electoral
votes each guy got.
Wouldn't it be cool if I could hook
up the list of who won electoral
votes where to something that
knew how to draw a list of states?
Wouldn't that be cool?
No?
Oh, come on, please.
Thank you.
Okay, thank you.
Well, too bad that part's not working.
No, no.
Actually, no, it is working.
It's not going to work yet
because I have to add a couple
of frameworks to my project.
Frameworks are collections of
objects that already exist.
We give you some.
I wrote some in my spare time,
and I entered that on the
timesheet appropriately.
And if I add them over here to—I happen
to have—I got this FireWire disk.
I love them FireWire disks.
Boy, oh boy,
because I've got conveniently over here
some frameworks that have just been
hanging around waiting for the right time
to be used in a situation just like this.
Let me add three of my favorite
frameworks of objects I've personally
written in the past to this application.
Actually, you know what?
Let me quit that.
Okay, now I'm going to do this.
We'll discuss that later.
I want to add them,
and once again I look at all
these little targets and I go,
oh man, the application server?
I think so.
The project builder can
build different targets.
It can build a collection of
things that go for the web server,
like static GIF images and stuff
that belong on the web server.
But in this case, I'm adding frameworks
to the actual binary.
And because I've done that,
I can take my little
election details component,
go back into WebObjects builder here.
And take advantage of some palettes.
Remember I talked about -- oops,
pardon me.
That's one app on the screen at the time.
How's that?
Remember I talked about palettes?
These little handy collections
of pre-written objects that
other people have written.
You get a bunch of these with WebObjects.
None of them draw maps,
but they do a number of useful things.
This one does -- you know,
one of the great things about
WebObjects is that this product
is so sophisticated that here's
a whole palette full of objects.
I have no idea what any of them do.
But it comes with WebObjects.
It's great.
It's Smil.
This is -- whoa, Smil.
What is that?
Synchronize multi -- is
there a session on that one?
Let's hope so, because this isn't it.
But let me --
In addition,
I've got some palettes of my own.
I'm a bit of a palette junkie,
and I've got a few of these guys.
There's one, and we'll open him,
and we'll open this guy,
and these are sort of
related to those frameworks.
These palettes are objects
that I've collected over the
years that do various useful,
interesting things.
I've got some little JavaScript doodads,
and I've got a thing that makes words
plural that was the big hit of WWDC 2000.
Thank you very much.
But, oh, wait until you see this.
These draw maps.
These take SVG files back on the server,
which you can create with
Adobe Illustrator or a
bunch of other applications.
They're just text files
that describe polygons.
Line, line, line, line, line, line, line,
line, line, and then you give it a label.
Montana.
Line, line, line, line, line, line, line,
line, line, line, line, line, line, line,
Indiana.
This line and this other line, Michigan.
And if you make one of these things up...
Two polygons.
If you have one of these things in SVG,
I wanted to find an excuse to
use this Xerxes parser that
we've put into WebObjects 5.
This is an XML parser
from the Apache project.
And so I wrote a little thing
that would parse one of these
SVG maps using this parser,
which is so easy, it's unbelievable.
And every time it saw a polygon,
it would look at the name of the state,
Montana.
And it would consult another list.
Is Montana on my list?
Okay, I will fill it in.
If it's not on my list,
I'll leave it outlined.
And I put a bunch of these things
together on a palette like this.
I've got one of Canada, one of the US,
one of Europe.
I've got one of North America,
which I might as well use that one since
I am thinking about my comrades back
home on holiday today at the beach.
[Transcript missing]
Wee!
Let me draw the... Oops.
There we go.
That's an object that will draw maps
of Canada and or the United States,
provided you tell it,
you bind it in WebObjects
Builder to something else that
knows about a list of regions.
This is why I love key value coding.
We're going to go in here,
we're going to take the
current campaign object,
take all of its electoral votes objects,
ask each of them for their state,
ask each of those states
for its state name,
and bind that to our selections list.
Can it be that easy?
People come up to me and they say, Steve,
can it, what?
What?
Thank you, Steve.
Oh, we, well, all right.
Oh, I bounded the wrong thing.
Pardon me.
Thank you for coughing.
Selections.
What's wrong with that?
There we go.
I put two of them in.
Oh, my mistake.
I got-- yeah.
This time?
There's this little validation
window in WoBuilder that will tell
you when you design a component,
you can say, this is a required binding.
This one's optional.
And this thing will
check when you save them.
And here I was panicking,
and it was right.
I did have one in there that was unbound.
Thank you for the coffee.
Did I save this?
I saved this.
Project builder will build this again.
I added the framework,
so they're going to find the code
to load this SVG parsing thing.
This is why I'm using
classic Internet Explorer.
SVG plugins are only available
for certain browsers,
not including the new
carbonized Internet Explorer.
That's why I'm using
this classic thing here.
We'll start this.
This is all going to be very
anticlimactic if this doesn't work,
which is a strong
possibility at this point.
launched the application.
Its class path is even more complicated
now because it includes three of my
frameworks and all them little doodads.
And I'm going to open this up here.
That looks good.
Tell me about all the guys named,
I don't know, Bush.
Oh, there's two of them.
Okay.
Tell me about this one.
Tell me about the big election of 2000.
Oh, this is getting complicated now.
It's loading up all these SVG things,
it's loading the Adobe SVG plugin,
and for each guy that
actually has electoral votes,
it's filling in that thing
with the necessary states.
But you're saying, Steve,
they're all the same color.
What can we do?
Well,
remember part--did you happen to notice
in my EO model that parties had a color?
You can ask the current--where
are we here in my object graph?
Campaign,
ask the current candidate for his party,
ask the party for its color,
tell the map to use that color.
Oh, wait, wrong one.
Here we go, quick.
I still can't really tell from
looking at who the winner is.
It looks to me like there's
more red pixels on the screen.
Is that how it works?
Is it like by square miles?
How do they do this?
But I might want to,
this might be a good opportunity to
write a little object that can solve
this problem for us once and for all.
So let's return to this EO model.
And, uh, just a moment,
I must have closed it.
Let me reopen this EO model here.
And we talked about the idea of
business logic in these objects.
And so far,
all the objects that I've got defined
here are what we call generic records.
They're just simple containers.
They store some data,
you can send them a message,
they respond with the data.
But they don't make any decisions.
They don't implement any logic.
But I might like to take a couple
of these and make Java classes for
them to be added to my project.
And we'll come back here and actually
add those files to the project itself.
It's now created campaign.java
and election.java.
And I want to make them
part of my project.
I'm going to look at
this panel again and go,
uh, yeah, OK, that one, all right.
And if we look at the election object,
[Transcript missing]
I want to write two methods here.
I want to write one method that sorts
everybody according to electoral votes,
because I understand that
is sort of how this works,
right?
And I want to write a second one that
takes the sorted list and returns
the guy at the top of the list.
And you all thought I was kidding
about using stickies for development.
There's a method that returns the winner.
It asks for all the sorted campaigns.
Here's a method that sorts
the campaigns by this key,
sum up the electoral votes for each guy.
Save those.
Let's build that.
What have I done?
I've just added two additional
methods to the election object.
If you look back in
WebObjects Builder over here,
you'll see that we're
going through elections,
and the election now suddenly
has this winner property.
These tools are talking back and forth.
WebObjects Builder has discovered
that there's an additional method
available to election objects.
You can send the message winner,
and it returns a campaign.
You can send the message
candidate to the winning campaign
and figure out who that was.
You can put something up
here that says your winner.
Last name.
First name, last name.
I think I, did I compile that while
that was happening?
I don't remember.
I think I did.
Never hurts to compile it again.
I want it really compiled, you know?
I want the bits to stick to the disk.
Cosmic rays could be entering the
auditorium here and messing this up.
is going to launch again here.
Lots of chatty error messages here.
If you'd like,
you can turn on a variable that
has all the SQL that's being sent
to the database spit out here.
That's fun to read.
Actually very useful for debugging.
Sometimes you just can't
figure out why is this so slow,
and it's because you were fetching
the same object too many times,
or you weren't batching
things in an effective,
efficient way that EOF lets you do.
It's all those H guys again.
John Hagelin, he ran in 2000.
Who's, uh oh, wait, wait, oh, he's close,
don't look at that, wait, hang on.
Alright, I'm gonna tell you something.
I've got this other monitor here.
I've got a sticky on here
to remind me what to do,
and right there in bold it says,
"Save the EO Model." And I forgot.
[Transcript missing]
Hopefully this is worth it.
Did we know who the winner is?
This isn't news to anybody, is it?
I mean, did you read the papers?
I hope so.
Is Gore still in it?
Is there still a chance?
How long does this go on?
I'm not sure.
Four years.
Four years, yeah.
Here, 2000 election.
It's fetching a whole bunch of things.
Your winner, George W.
Bush.
It evaluated that custom business
rule to add up electoral votes
and decide who had the most.
And in fact, so long as it's done that,
remember I added a method
called sorted campaigns.
We could take that table there,
instead of going through
all the unsorted campaigns,
we could ask the election
for the sorted campaigns,
and that, what am I doing here?
That repetition would
look that much better.
[Transcript missing]
So I think I've shown some
relatively interesting concepts here.
The idea that you can
have business objects,
and that was a pretty trivial rule.
I was just sorting something
and taking the first one.
But you can implement much more
complicated business rules,
and you frequently do with
WebObjects in your own application.
Students, are they eligible to graduate?
Well, we check,
have they paid their parking fines,
and have they returned
all their library books?
Did they pass all the tests?
Does the supervisor
still say they're okay?
You can implement that kind of
logic when it's appropriate in
these middle-tier business objects.
All this stuff is being done
in a database-independent way.
None of these objects are even aware
which database they were coming from,
which means you can do one last
moderately cool thing here.
Remember I made this EO model here that
said let's talk to the US elections
database and let's fetch candidate
objects in elections and so on?
Let me take that out of my model.
And we got my FireWire disk here.
I'm bringing a different EO model.
I'm going to bring in another EO model
and put it back in the same place.
And we'll start this
application again here.
Oops,
we'll compile it and start it again here.
Maybe I had to do that.
So I've dropped a totally
different EO model in here,
totally different,
fetching from an entirely
probably different database.
It could be an entirely
different database than the
one that we're using here,
it could be.
But we don't know because we just
put an object model in there,
and the object model has all
the information about how
to actually fetch things.
So once this thing gets going again here,
let's...
This time fetch all the candidates.
Oh, wait a minute.
Who are these guys?
Stockwell Day Reform Party.
What is this?
Different database.
Oh my god.
Tell me about that election.
Wait, wait, wait, wait.
Hold your applause.
Here it comes.
Your winner is Jean Chrétien.
Oh, he won all those seats.
And Day, he won all those ones out west.
And the Black Quebecois,
very popular out there.
And NDP seemed to have some
large chunk of northern Manitoba.
So this application is
completely ignorant of what
data source it's actually using.
It all revolves around that EO model.
I told it to use a different database.
It could have been a different schema.
And I could tell you it
was a different schema,
and I wouldn't have to show you,
and you'd have to believe me,
but it was the same.
But it made the same kind of
objects with the same relationships.
And the complete separation of back
end and front end of interface,
these SVG map drawn
objects at the front end,
these data bearing objects that are
coming out of OpenBase or FrontBase
or Oracle or how many people added
the IBM number and the Informix
number together on that graph?
It could be any one of those databases.
And you see the separation of the back
end and the front end enables you to
do some pretty interesting things here.
How many people are wondering what the
heck happened to Nunavut on this map?
Canadians are going,
"There's no Nunavut on the
map." The Americans are going,
"What?
Who?" Had a little
problem with one polygon.
Can I go back to my slides, please?
I want to finish up with
a few more concepts here.
Oh, thank you.
Nobody said you had to use HTML.
I was using SVG here,
which is a form of XML that's
sent to the client.
We have some pretty cool
technologies that let you
build pure Java applications,
including Java Client.
I would certainly urge you to go
and see the Direct-to-Java Client.
I believe there's two
Direct-to-Java Client sessions.
And the Direct-to-Web -- pardon
me -- go and check out the report
mill and see how they're delivering
PDF in sort of a similar way here.
Talk to guys like me about
how we did this XML thing.
And take a look at
some of our assistants.
We have Direct-to-Web,
which takes an EO model like I just
made and makes you a full-featured
application that's pretty much
done that you can tweak through
this very interesting rules engine,
which you can learn about at
the Direct-to-Web session.
Direct-to-Java Client,
the same sort of thing with
a Java Client interface.
And for deployment,
we've got a good session on
deployment that tells you what
the heck is going on here.
How do I keep all these arrows going?
What is the role of the WebObjects
task demon that runs on each of these
machines to keep an eye on everything?
How does it communicate with
the WebObjects task demon?
And then we have the WebObjects
adapter through the firewall.
What are these messages that
are going back and forth?
Well, we have a whole architecture and
a tool called Monitor that lets
you describe how many applications
you're running and where.
And it sort of lays
everything out for you.
It starts them up.
It gives you a UI like this where
it will start three copies on that
machine and two on this machine
and inform the adapter on the
web server about what's going on.
And generally, it works pretty well.
All right, it always works pretty well.
I'm sorry.
This stuff works great.
Engineering has done a heroic job
in migrating this stuff to Java.
The fact that it works at all,
considering where they came from this
Objective-C code base to where it is now,
it's nothing short of miraculous.
We have a number of,
how many people here are going
to all the WebObjects sessions?
The people here from the whole track,
well, that's great.
You're going to love all of these.
These are all great.
And what is the deal
with WebObjects 4.5.1?
Well, Mac OS X Objective-C only.
You don't want this unless you already
have a WebObjects project that you
want to bring to a Mac OS X machine.
If you're starting something new,
you want,
you definitely want WebObjects 5.
You do want WebObjects 4.5.1 if
you're going to bring a product to,
if you're already using 4.5 on one
of the other platforms as well.
You can move that along.
The only thing that's really missing
is support for Java on Mac OS X.
With this product.
We still support Java and
Objective-C both on Windows NT and
Windows 2000 and Solaris and HP UX,
just like before.
But this is it.
We swear this is the
last time we're doing an
Objective-C release with WebObjects.
We're no more fooling around here.
We're not going to.
So if you're starting something new,
I really urge you to look at WebObjects
5 because 4.5.1 is for people
migrating existing projects along.
Moving from 4.5 to 5,
pretty easy if you've got a project.
We've got a whole session on that.
The APIs are pretty close.
Learn more.
A couple of WebObjects training
classes that you can use.
A week-long class on development,
another week-long class
on more development,
and another three-day
class on deployment.
Excellent,
excellent classes taught by our
iServices technical training guys.
Feel free to come and see us in the
lab in room K in the other building,
which is on the ground floor.
Play with all this stuff.
I'm going to try to have my
demo running on the machine.
I'll try to have that set up if
anyone wants to see what the deal
with that SVG mapping thing was
and why none of it was missing.
Maybe you can help me
put it back in there.
And there's lots more sessions.
They asked us to put up the most
relevant sessions on these slides.
I couldn't really think what they
were because they're all good.
From this point on,
I have the advantage in doing the
technical overview that all this
great stuff is following behind me,
and I can refer you to virtually any
session that's coming up on WebObjects.
Who to contact?
Tony, Bob, iServices guys,
a whole bunch of URLs.